
Action Jackson is a 2014 Indian Hindi-language action thriller film directed by Prabhu Deva and produced by Gordhan P. Tanwani and Sunil Lulla.[4] The film features Ajay Devgn in a dual role, alongside Sonakshi Sinha, Yami Gautam, Manasvi Mamgai,  Kunaal Roy Kapur and Anandaraj.  
Action Jackson was released on 5 December 2014, where it received mixed-to-negative reviews from critics and bombed at the box office.
Vishi is a small-time crook who would do anything for money and falls in love with Khushi, a simple HR executive. Vishi, who frequently gets involved in fights, publicly beats up a street gangster, who later seeks a revenge attack with his gang. The gangster and his gang brutally beat up Vishi and easily escapes. It is then revealed that the person they had beaten is actually Vishi's lookalike Jai. ACP Shirke arrests Jai and hands him over to a group of gangsters led by Pedro, but Jai single-handedly kills them all and is revealed to be a professional assassin nicknamed AJ.
Past: AJ works as a right-hand man for a crime boss named Xavier Fonseca, where he single-handedly rescued Xavier's sister Marina from a bunch of kidnappers. Marina soons falls for Jai, but he rejects her as he is married to Anusha. An enraged Xavier tries to kill Anusha to get AJ married to Marina, which leaves her brutally injured. Jai escapes to India and is in the process of getting her treated. 
Present: Vishi spots Jai and soon learns about his last. Jai asks Vishi to go to Bangkok disguised as AJ in order to fool Xavier and Marina, while he makes time to get Anusha operated as she is expecting a baby. Vishi agrees to help and goes to Bangkok along with his friend Musa. Shirke finds AJ's lookalike and tries to inform Xavier, but he is murdered in style that triggers suspicion in Xavier's mind. Upon realizing the situation, Marina tortures Musa to know the truth, where Musa reveals that Vishi is the one who masqueraded as AJ. Xavier hatches a plan to bring AJ to Bangkok by kidnapping Anusha and her child.
However, it is revealed that Vishi is actually in Mumbai as he and AJ switched their places in the airport at a time after the job is done. AJ reaches the spot and kills all of Xavier's henchmen. In a fight with Marina, AJ smashes her against the furnace and Marina is burned alive. After killing Xavier, he runs away with Anusha and the child. Later the child is revealed to be safe, rescued by one of Xavier's henchmen Robert. AJ and Vishi meets at the airport  and Anusha requests Vishi to marry Khushi soon.
The soundtrack was composed by Himesh Reshammiya, while the lyrics were written by Shabbir Ahmed and Sameer. The introduction of "Gangster Baby" is from "Adiyae Kolluthe" from Vaaranam Aayiram.[5]
Action Jackson received mixed to negative reviews from critics who praised Devgn's performances, cinematography, music and stylized action sequences, but criticised its humor, plot and screenwriting.
Prarthna Sarkar from International Business Times gave Action Jackson 3 out of 5 stars  stating it is a "bad dream" for viewers.[6] Gayatri Sarkar from Zee News gave 1 star out of 5 and wrote that the film failed to entertain the audience.[7] Deepanjana Paul from Firstpost praised the font used for the credits saying it was legible.[8] Rajeev Masand rated the film 3 out of 5, feeling that the film has excessive action.[9] Under a headline calling the film a feminist milestone, Raja Sen for Rediff rated it 3 out of 5 stars, saying that while the film is filled with "relentless absurdity", the women propel the narrative in a refreshing way.[10] Rachit Gupta of Filmfare gave a similar rating of 3 out of 5 stars stating that the genre mixing of unscripted comedy and stylized action is " too inconsistent to garner any appreciation".[11] Mumbai Mirror similarly gave 3 out of 5 stars and responded positively.[12]
