
Apne (transl. Ours) is a 2007 Indian Hindi-language sports drama film directed by Anil Sharma. It is the first film to feature Dharmendra and his real-life sons Sunny Deol and Bobby Deol together. Previously Sunny and Bobby had worked together in Dillagi (1999) and Dharmendra and Sunny had also appeared together in Sultanat (1986) and Kshatriya (1993). Katrina Kaif, Shilpa Shetty and Kirron Kher play the female leads. The film opened to an excellent response across India and emerged as a hit overseas as well.
Dharmendra plays the role of a disgraced ex-boxer Baldev Chaudhary who tries to wash a stain in his boxing career through his sons Angad and Karan (Sunny & Bobby Deol). Dharmendra had earlier played the role of a boxer in the film Main Intequam Loonga (1982). Footage from that film is used as flashback scenes in this film to show Baldev's career as a boxer.
Former Olympic medallist boxer Baldev Choudhary is disgraced while competing for the World Heavy weight championship when a betting syndicate falsely accuses him of drug doping. He tries to erase this stain upon his honour by training up his son, Angad, but financial difficulties keep them from achieving his dream, straining their relationship with each other. Baldev's younger son Karan, an aspiring musician with a paralyzed arm, has just launched his first music album. Baldev trains a local boy to get into a media hyped TV boxing show, but is dropped for a better coach at the last minute. Baldev, very upset at this, is consoled by Karan, who overcomes his paralysis in a moment of emotional intensity. Realising his father is depressed, Karan gives up his own dream of a musical career to become a boxer and please his father. Karan persists with training and wins a series of fights, thinking that victory will bring his family together. The final match is with the current world heavy weight champion; Karan is tricked, and he ends up paralysed in a hospital bed. Baldev, who wanted to wash a stigma, is now about to lose his son. When Karan reveals the world heavy weight champion cheated, Angad decides to return to boxing and win the title for his father. Although Angad is also badly injured in boxing match but somehow survives and wins the match. Meanwhile, Karan suffers liver damage and requires a liver to survive. A pang of guilt stricken Baldev pleads with the doctors to use his liver, but the doctors reject the idea. In a stroke of luck, a liver is given to Karan through an unknown donor. In the end, Baldev, who was going to give up his life for Karan, is instead alive and happy with his family.
The Soundtrack of the movie was composed by Himesh Reshammiya. Apne was the last film in which Reshammiya and Sonu Nigam worked together due to the issues between them both.
Apne opened to a very good response throughout the country especially in the Northern territories most notably Punjab where it had a mammoth opening becoming a gigantic blockbuster in the long run.[2] The rest of the country saw a good opening for Apne. The Gross Collection of Apne was ₹45 crore.[3]
The film has been declared a semi-hit overseas and a hit in India.[4]
Taran Adarsh in his review stated that "Apne is rich in emotions and has the potential to strike a chord with families. Those who love emotional fares are bound to take a liking for its theme."[5] The movie was also dubbed into Punjabi.
A sequel named Apne 2 was officially announced on 30 November 2020, and will star Dharmendra, Sunny Deol, Bobby Deol and Sunny's son Karan Deol. It goes on floors in March 2021 and has been scheduled for a theatrical release on 5 November 2021, coinciding with Diwali. Delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.[6]
