
Aryan is a 2006 Indian Hindi-language sports drama film written and directed by Abhishek Kapoor and produced by Poonam Khubani, Manisha Israni and Vipin Anand. The film stars Sohail Khan and Sneha Ullal with Puneet Issar, Satish Shah, Supriya Karnik and Inder Kumar in supporting roles.[1][2]
Aryan is the college boxing champion. He is training under Ranveer Singh Bagga with another student Ranjeet, in order to achieve his dream: winning the national championship. His girlfriend Neha supports him unconditionally, and he relies heavily upon her. However, after his life turns unexpectedly into another direction, he gives up boxing and marries instead. He becomes a father and takes up a job as sports' commentator. Despite this, his life suffers severe ups and downs in the process. Aryan also learns that Ranjeet got kicked out of the college boxing team by coach Ranveer for taking steroids in the locker room, and the former suspects Aryan had informed him, leaving Aryan confused and frustrated. Aryan's frustration further leads him to suspect Neha of having an affair with her boss and director Sameer. Because of his temper, Neha and Ranveer separate from him shortly after that. In order to win his self-esteem back, Aryan accepts the proposal for making a comeback in boxing. Ranjeet challenges Aryan in the national boxing championship in order to exact his revenge from the latter. Aryan undergoes rigorous training and faces Ranjeet in the finals. A fight ensues in the ring where Ranjeet almost defeats Aryan after severely injuring him. But at the last minute, Neha, who forgives Aryan, goes to the stadium to support him. After witnessing Neha, Aryan subsequently defeats Ranjeet and becomes the national boxing champion, and reconciles with his family.
The music for Sultan is composed by Anand Raaj Anand.[3]
According to the Indian trade website Box Office India, with around 11,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's thirteenth highest-selling.[4]
Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 1.5 stars out of 5, writing "On the whole, ARYAN is a well-made film that combines style and substance beautifully. Unfortunately, the box-office will sing a different tune altogether! Reasons: [i] Not-too-attractive face-value, [ii] Delayed release and [iii] Oppositions in Kabul Express this week and Bhagam Bhag next week. To sum up, despite strong merits, ARYAN will be knocked down in the box-office ring!"[1] Priyanka Jain of Rediff.com gave a negative review, stating "Seriously, I too don't understand why anyone would make a film like this."[5]
