
Electronics Weekly is a weekly trade journal for electronics professionals which was first published by Reed Business Information on 7 September 1960. It was the first British Electronics newspaper[1] and its founding editor was Cyril C. Gee who had previously been the editor of British Communications and Electronics. It is available in print and electronic formats, and the readership is audited by BPA Worldwide, which verifies its circulation twice yearly. The magazine's circulation in 2007 was 40,918 copies.[2] In August 2012 Metropolis International purchased the title from RBI.[3]
Topics covered within the magazine include news and features on design, components, production and research, as well as news stories and product listings.  Electronics Weekly is available free to qualified electronics professionals. The bulk of revenue received to fund the magazine comes from display and recruitment advertising.[citation needed]
ElectronicsWeekly.com is a website for electronics professionals and provides users with news, analysis, features and business stories. The website also provides information via blogs and RSS feeds.[citation needed]
In March 2015, ElectronicsWeekly.com launched EW Compare,[4] a new comparison tool powered by OEMsecrets.com,[5] a price comparison shopping engine for electronic parts and components. The comparison tool is integrated into product articles, so readers can search product news, compare and then buy online from authorized electronics distributors and manufacturers.[citation needed]
There is a wide range of blogs[6] on ElectronicsWeekly.com. They include: Mannerisms, Made By Monkeys, Gadget Master, Eyes on Android, University Electronics Research, Disti-World and Electro-ramblings.[citation needed]
Electronics Weekly runs an annual awards ceremony called The Elektras.[7] It has been running since 2002 and the aim of the awards is to reward the achievements of individuals and firms across the European electronics industry.[citation needed]

This British science and technology magazine-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.See tips for writing articles about magazines. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.This trade magazine–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.See tips for writing articles about magazines. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.