
GamesMaster was a monthly multi-format computer and video game magazine published by Future plc in the United Kingdom.[1] As of 2012, it was the biggest selling multi-format video games magazine in the United Kingdom, outselling its partner publication Edge.[2] Along with partner magazine GamesTM, it ceased print in November 2018.[3] It was originally launched to complement the television show GamesMaster.
The magazine was launched in January 1993, to complement the television show of the same name. While the show later ceased broadcasting, the magazine continued,[4] outlasting the show by 20 years.[5]
The magazine published a number of reviews and previews of games; however this covered only half of the magazine as it also included latest gaming news, posters, letters from readers and monthly competitions. The popularity of the magazine grew and game producers sought to achieve the elusive GamesMaster “Gold Award” for a reference on their package. The Gold Award was awarded to games that scored 90% or higher.
The Philippine publishing house Summit Media started a local edition of GamesMaster in September 2003. Each issue was initially priced at PhP95.00 (around US$2.06 or £1.27 as of December 2009), but later issues were priced at PhP100 (around US$2.17 or £1.34 as of December 2009). The edition quickly gained popularity with the local community because of its affordable price and extensive coverage of the Filipino gaming scene. GamesMaster Philippines ceased publication in September 2006 due to a corporate restructuring. Games and tech journalist Ed Geronia became the magazine's Editor-in-Chief with Jaykee Evangelista as its art director.
Between 1996 and 1999, a Lebanese publishing house[which?] republished the British version after a literal translation to Arabic.
Despite the very low quality in translation[citation needed], the magazine sold well due to the huge demand from Arab video gamers which wasn't fulfilled with any real publication from the region. Each issue was priced for 25 Riyals/Durhams and it sold out almost the same day it reached bookshops[citation needed].

This video game magazine or journal-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.See tips for writing articles about magazines. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.This British science and technology magazine-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.See tips for writing articles about magazines. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page.