
Lahore is a 2010 Indian Hindi sports film that was released on 19 March 2010. It was directed by Sanjay Puran Singh Chauhan and produced by Vivek Khatkar, Jagat Singh Rana & Sunil Sharma, with Sai Om Films Pvt. Ltd.'s, and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. The movie is loosely based on the American martial arts movie Best of the Best.
The film stars debutants Aanaahad and Shraddha Das in lead roles and has veteran actors like Farooq Shaikh, Nafisa Ali, Nirmal Pandey, Sushant Singh, Sabyasachi Chakrabarty, Saurabh Shukla, Ashish Vidyarthi, Kelly Dorji, Mukesh Rishi, Jeeva, Shraddha Nigam in key roles.
An Indian kickboxer defeats a Pakistani kickboxer in an Asian kickboxing tournament. The event ends in a tragedy due to the Pakistani players' intemperance. The peace process initiated by the two countries struggles to gain its momentum. This is especially when the Indian hero's brother is determined to avenge his family and country during a second international bout that is being held in Lahore.[1]
The film was shot in Delhi, Mumbai, Lahore, Hyderabad, Ladakh, Lonavala, Malaysia, Bhiwandi, Chembur, Ghatkopar, and Chinchpokli.
Hong Kong stuntmaster Tony Leung Siu Hung was the action choreographer of Lahore. The background score was by Wayne Sharpe. Lisbeth Scott of Avatar, Munich, and Chronicles of Narnia fame has sung vocals for Lahore – her first Asian film. Rob Miller, who earlier won a Filmfare award for Chak De! India (2007), is Lahore's sports consultant.[2] MM Kreem has done the music.
Lahore's DVDs and VCDs are available in Hindi with English subtitles on Moserbaer Home Video.[3] The DVD also features the making of the film.
Lahore has won international awards, including Special Jury Award at the 42nd WorldFest-Houston International Film Festival,[4] Best Actor – Aanaahad at Tenerife International Film Festival (UK), Most Aspiring Film Maker (Sanjay Chauhan) at Filmmakers International Film Festival (UK), Best actor – Aanaahad – at Salento International Film Festival, Italy and had all six nominations at Asian Festival Of First Films, Singapore.
After setting the international festival circuits ablaze, Lahore won two awards at the 57th National Film Awards, Indira Gandhi Award for Best Debut Film of a Director went to producer Vivek Khatkar and director Sanjay Puran Singh Chauhan while Farooque Shaikh won National Film Award for Best Supporting Actor.[5]
The film was not released in Pakistan as it was regarded there as portraying Pakistan in a bad light.[6]
Nominated
Nominated[7]
