Linux Format is the UK's first Linux-specific magazine,[1] and as of 2013 was the best-selling Linux title in the UK. It is also exported to many countries worldwide. It is published by Future plc (which produces a number of other computer magazines).[2] Linux Format is commonly abbreviated to LXF, and issues are referred to with LXF as a prefix followed by the issue number (for example, LXF102 refers to the 102nd issue).
It began as a one-issue pilot in 1999 called Linux Answers, and began full publication as Linux Format in May 2000 after being launched and produced by a small team consisting of Editor Nick Veitch, Art Editor Chris Crookes and staff writer Richard Drummond, who together created the magazine's core values and initial design appearance.[3][4]
Currently Linux Format has translated editions available in Italy, Greece and Russia.[5] Many magazines are exported around the world, principally to the USA where they are sold in Barnes & Noble stores, as well as other large book stores.
Articles within Linux Format regularly feature at-length series and practical tutorials to teach and allow users to expand their skills in using the Linux operating system and its associated software applications. Contributions are encouraged to be submitted by readers.
Linux Format shares the UK market place with an English-language version of Linux Magazine and formerly with Linux User and Developer which discontinued in September 2018.
Linux Format includes similar content to that found in most computer magazines, but aimed specifically at users of the Linux operating system. There are reviews, round-ups, technology features and tutorials aimed at all levels of users.
The magazine no longer comes with a DVD containing full Linux distributions, and other free software.
The magazine is currently[when?] edited by Neil Mohr with a team composed of Efraín Hernández-Mendoza as Art Editor, Jonni Bidwell as Technical Editor and Chris Thornett as Operations Editor. Previous staff members include Graham Morrison, Andrew Gregory, Mike Saunders and Ben Everard who went on to produce Linux Voice magazine (which later merged with Linux Magazine).[6]
The magazine is published 13 times a year.[7]
Linux Format has a dedicated magazine website[8] which contains forums for readers to interact with the editorial staff and writers, as well as an extensive reference section for the articles in the magazine. In February 2009, the Linux Format editorial staff launched TuxRadar.[9] TuxRadar has become the primary method of the editorial team getting Linux news on to the Internet, with the Linux Format webpage undergoing some modifications to become more community-focused.
