
The following is a list of sports/games, divided by category.
According to the World Sports Encyclopaedia (2003), there are 8,000 indigenous sports and sporting games.[1]
Sports that are played with some sort of board as the primary equipment.
Sports using bicycles or unicycles.
A combat sport is a competitive contact sport where two combatants fight against each other using certain rules of engagement.
Decathlon, heptathlon, and the pentathlons consist of ten, seven, and five-component contests that are scored together using one points system.
Sport Parkour and Freerunning are empirically measured competitions of skill, speed or style on an obstacle based course. Self expression, demonstration of control and power are measured.
Sports using guns (firearms, air guns, etc.).
These sports use water (a river, pool, etc.).
Sports involving the use of motorized vehicles
Sports falling into two or more categories.
Sports in which dogs participate.
Sports using a horse.
Sometimes considered blood sports.
Sports that have originated from rodeos in the old Western Americas.
Sports in which the method of scoring is through goals.
Games involving opponents hitting a ball over a net using a racket, or other piece of equipment, or merely gloved/barehanded:
Games involving opponents hitting a ball against a wall/walls using a racket, or other piece of equipment, or merely gloved/barehanded:

Requiring little or no physical exertion or agility, mind sports are often not considered true sports. Some mind sports are recognised by sporting federations.
The following list is intended to represent anything that is likely to be referred to as a mind sport, not to argue their validity as sports.
Potentially other sports are listed here.
Sports played using electronic devices.
See #Skiing
Sports mainly based on sheer power.
Sports where the main objective is to hit a certain target.
Sports that involve teams.
Sports which use the wind (apart from sailing):
Fictional sports that are played in real life:
