Naqada (Egyptian Arabic: نقادة‎ Naqāda; Coptic language: ⲛⲉⲕⲁⲧⲏⲣⲓⲟⲛ Nekatērion;[4] Ancient Greek: Παμπανις Pampanis,[3] Ancient Egyptian: Nbyt), is a town on the west bank of the Nile in Qena Governorate, Egypt, situated ca. 20 km north of Luxor. It includes the villages of Tukh, Khatara, Danfiq, and Zawayda. According to 1960 census, it is one of the most uninhabited areas and had only 3,000 inhabitants, mostly of Christian faith[5] who preserved elements of the Coptic language up until the 1930s.[6]
Naqada stands near the site of a prehistoric Egyptian necropolis: The town, called Ombos, was the centre of the cult of Set and large tombs were built there c. 3500 BCE.[7]
The large quantity of remains from Naqada has enabled the dating of the entire archeological period throughout Egypt and its environs, hence the town name Naqada is used for the pre-dynastic Naqada culture c. 4400–3000 BCE. Other Naqada culture archeological sites include el Badari, the Gerzeh culture, and Nekhen.[citation needed]
In the Stargate franchise, alien civilizations make extensive use of a mineral, naquada, named after the archaeological site.
Sickle made of flint, Egypt, Naqada period, end of the fourth millennium BCE, Dagon Museum, Haifa
Acheulean hand-axe from Egypt. Found on a hilltop plateau, 1400 feet above sea level, 9 miles NNW of the city of Naqada, Egypt. Paleolithic. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, London
Black granite, seated statue of Sennefer with cartouche of Amenhotep II (Amenophis) on right arm. From the temple of Seth at Naqada, Egypt. The Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, London
Naqada I bone figure with lapis lazuli inlays (the inlays are a modern addition). British Museum
Evolution of Egyptian prehistoric pottery styles, from Naqada I to Naqada II and Naqada III
Limestone architectural fragment. A door jamb, part of a doorway. From the temple of Seth (which was built by Thutmosis III) at Naqada, Egypt. 18th Dynasty. Petrie Museum
25°54′N 32°43′E﻿ / ﻿25.900°N 32.717°E﻿ / 25.900; 32.717
