
The Kung Fu Master is a 2020 Indian Malayalam-language martial arts film written and directed by Abrid Shine and produced by Shibu Thekkumpuram under the banner of Fullon Studio Frames. The film stars Neeta Pillai, Sanoop Dinesh and Jiji Scaria in the lead roles. The music and background score of the film was composed by Ishaan Chhabra. Arjun Ravi, who is the son of actor-director Major Ravi made his debut as a cinematographer with this film.
Rishi Ram and his sister Rithu Ram are martial arts experts in Rishikesh, who sets out to finish a notorious gangster named Louis Antony in order to avenge their families' death.
The film was shot at Himalayan Valley, Badrinath and India-China border. The martial arts sequences were influenced by the action films of Bruce Lee, Jackie Chan and Jet Li. Neeta Pillai trained Kung fu for a year to perform  action scenes in the film.[5][6][7][8]
The music and background score was composed by Ishaan Chhabra, and the lyrics for the songs were written by Sreerekha Bhaskaran.
The film was released on 24 January 2020.
Sajin Shrijith of Cinema Express gave 3.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "The Kung Fu Master is a complete contrast to whatever he has made before in that it is a very plain, straightforward work. Abrid foregoes his usual experiments with screenplay structure in favour of an adrenaline rush this time. But it is not without its novelty factors."[9] Cris of The News Minute gave 3 out of 5 stars and wrote "Baring the few read-from-a-textbook-like dialogue deliveries at the beginning, the film is engaging, paced, but perhaps lacks effort in its scripting. Abrid appears to have dedicated most of the scripting to the fights and then let the rest of the story take care of itself."[10]
G. Ragesh of Onmanorama gave 2.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "Except for the boldness to experiment in choice of themes, The Kung Fu Master is neither above nor below a notch in Abrid's career graph."[11] Anna Mathews of The Times of India gave 2.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "The action choreography is headed by Abrid Shine and is exciting, though low on the novelty factor. The movie on the whole progresses very predictably but watch if you want to see a girl trade punches with panache."[12] S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote "The Kung Fu Master showcases the kind of action that Malayalam cinema has not witnessed before. It makes the film stand on its own despite having one of the shoddiest of scripts in recent times."[13]
