
Toofaan (transl. Storm) is an 2021 Indian Hindi-language sports drama film[1] directed by Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra. It stars Farhan Akhtar, Paresh Rawal, Mrunal Thakur and Hussain Dalal. In the film, Aziz Ali is an orphaned extortionist in Dongri who beats up shopkeepers for money. He gets into a fight and goes to a hospital, where the doctor, Ananya Prabhu criticizes him for being an extortionist and orders him out.
Toofaan premiered at 16 July 2021 on Amazon Prime Video.[2][3]
Aziz Ali (Farhan Akhtar) is an orphaned extortionist in Dongri who beats up shopkeepers for money. He gets into a fight and goes to a hospital, where the doctor, Ananya Prabhu (Mrunal Thakur) criticizes him for being an extortionist and orders him out. One day, at a local boxing school, Ali comes across a video of Muhammad Ali and decides to start boxing.
He goes to Coach Narayan "Nana" Prabhu's (Paresh Rawal) boxing school but is defeated in a match because of his lack of technique. When he visits the hospital again, Ananya is kinder when she learns that he was taking care of and buying gifts for orphaned children, but later on, sees him rough up a person on the street. When he confronts her, she asks him if he wants to be a boxer or a gangster.
He decides to go back to Nana's boxing school after quitting his extortionist role and begins training.
Eventually, he gets his boxing license, and starts winning matches, and is dubbed "Toofaan" by Nana. He also forms a romantic relationship with Ananya, and Nana angrily berates him when he finds out, thinking that Aziz is conning his daughter Ananya. He is also angry that Aziz is in a relationship with a Hindu as he is a Muslim. Nana also disowns Ananya and asks her to leave his house. Aziz and Ananya start looking for a place to live but find it difficult to due to their religious differences. The only house that they can stay in requires Aziz to return to his gangster role for his old boss, which he refuses. Instead, Ananya goes to a girls' hostel.
At his next boxing match, Aziz is offered a large sum of money to lose, which he does, but is later caught, and receives a five-year ban. After reconciling with Ananya, they marry, and sometime later, have a child, whom they name Myra. However, Nana stops speaking to Ananya, and does not want to meet the baby. Five years later, Aziz is an unfit father to Myra who receives his reinstatement boxing letter, but he trashes it because he does not want to return to boxing. After telling Ananya that he doesn't want to go back to boxing, she goes behind his back and gets his new boxing license.
On the way back, at the train station, there is a stampede at the zebra crossing and Ananya dies. Seeing his boxing license and wanting to fullfil Ananya's dream, Aziz decides to restart boxing and gets back in shape. Meanwhile, Nana begins to spend more time with Myra after Ananya's death. Aziz gets back in shape and wins a few matches, but in one match, the judge, Darmesh Patil (Darshan Kumar), who happens to be a former state champion who Aziz earlier defeated, bribes the referee to let the other boxer win. Aziz loses as the other boxer performed a series of illegal punches, in which the referee didn't call out.
Later, Nana meets up with Patil and secretly records him explaining what had happened. Patil is later fired from the boxing federation. Aziz is reinstated and has a chance to fight again, but it facing Prithvi Singh (Gaganpreet Sharma), who is known for sending his opponents to the hospital before the second round can begin. Aziz begins to lose, but Nana comes back to coach him and motivates him to fight for Ananya, eventually winning.
Filming commenced in Dongri on 26 August 2019 and was completed in March 2020.[4] Darshan Kumar who plays the role of boxer Dharmesh Patil was trained by Hollywood actor Will Smith's trainer Darrell Foster.[5] Boxer Neeraj Goyat , who is himself a professional boxer trained Farhan Akhtar for his role and also acted in the movie.[6]
Earlier the movie screening was announced to be released on 2 October 2020, which coincided with Gandhi Jayanti.[7] However, it got advanced to 18 September 2020, which later on was indefinitely delayed due to COVID-19 pandemic in India. On March 10, 2021 Amazon Prime Video announced that the film would be released on their platform on May 21, but was later postponed after India faced a massive 2nd wave of COVID-19.[8] Finally, the film premiered on 16 July 2021 on Amazon Prime Video.[2]
Upon release, Toofaan received mixed reviews from the film critics, who praised Akhtar's performance but criticized the screenplay and the predictable plot of the film.[9][10][11] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a rating of 53% based on 15 reviews and an average rating of 4.8/10.[12]
Shubhra Gupta from The Indian Express gave Toofan a rating of 3.5/5 and wrote, "Toofaan is your underprivileged-underdog-to-boxing-champion tale whose arc is utterly predictable, but what makes this film such an enjoyable watch is the way it has been written and performed. You know exactly where it will go, but the journey pops with smart feints and jabs, and ends with a satisfying punch".[13] Gautaman Bhaskaran from News 18 wrote "Farhan Akhtar is exceptional first as the Dongri 'Dada' and later as a mellowed lover, but unfortunately, the film clutters its canvas with too many issues".[14] Anna M. M. Vetticad from the Firstpost gave Toofan a rating of 2.75/5 and described the film as "A promising – and long – tale of boxing, Islamophobia and love fizzles out in its third hour".[15]
The music for the film is composed by Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy, Dub Sharma, Samuel–Akanksha and Daniel Lozinski while the lyrics are written by Javed Akhtar, D'Evil and Manoj Kumar Nath.
