
R. Rajashekhar 
Yuvaraja is a 2001 Indian Kannada-language sports drama film directed by Puri Jagannadh and produced by R. Srinivas. The film stars Shiva Rajkumar, Bhavna Pani and Lisa Ray. The film is the remake of 1999 Telugu film Thammudu which was based on the 1979 American film Breaking Away.[1][2] The film was released on 2 November 2001 across  cinema halls in Karnataka. The film finished a 50 day theatrical run.[3]
Raju alias Yuvaraja  is the youngest son of a family and a careless guy, always going around girls and enjoying with them. His womanizing habits are a source of heartburn for his father. However, his elder brother Chakri is a kickboxer and his father's favourite son, who is very fond of him. Janu, Yuvaraja's neighbour, is in love with him, but it is just one sided as Raju considers her a good friend and a source of money and cars to impress girls (Janu's father is a garage owner).
Raju starts going out with Lovely, a rich college girl, and poses as a wealthy millionaire's son to impress her and love her. Lovely falls for his lies and starts loving him. However, she soon finds out that Raju has lied to her and dumps him and insults him in front of his father. Raju's father, tired of his son's antics, kicks him out of the house and shuns him. Raju is now homeless and Jaanu tells him to be more responsible of himself. Later, Chakri is attacked by Rohith, who happens to be Lovely's new boyfriend and his enemy, and his friends and is bedridden, unable to take part in the kickboxing championship. Raju decides to fight for his brother and to redeem himself in his father's eyes by fighting in the championship match against Rohith. Deciding to seek revenge for his brother's accident and to prove himself to his father, Yuvaraja defeats Rohith after a long and bloody boxing match, redeems himself in front of his father's eyes and finally accepts Janu's love. Hence the film ends with a happy ending, and everyone greets Raju as Yuvaraja.
The music of the film was composed by Ramana Gogula and lyrics were written by K. Kalyan. The song "Missamma Kissamma" is based on "Bangala Kathamulo" from Telugu film Badri (2000). The song "Chandana Siri" is based on "Kala Kalakuthu" from Tamil film Badri (2001) (Tamil remake of Thammudu). The song "Monalisa" is based on song "Ramachilaka" from Telugu film Yuvaraju (2000). The other three songs were reused from Thammudu.
All lyrics are written by K. KalyanA critic from Sify wrote that "Yuvaraja is a total waste of time and money".[4]
