
Ladislav Hojer (15 March 1958 – 7 August 1986) was a Czechoslovak sadistic rapist, serial killer and cannibal who murdered five women between 1978 and 1981 in Czechoslovakia.
Hojer's father died of cancer when he was young. His mother soon remarried, but she soon died of cancer as well. His inexperienced stepfather soon moved away, leaving Hojer alone with his brother Jaroslav in an apartment in Motol. After completing a special school, he was trained by a glazier. His IQ was determined as 88, a below average score. Shortly before his capture, he lived in an apartment by himself because his brother had taken up military service. He was arrested on 11 February 1982, in connection with an investigation into the murder of Anna Š., committed at the beginning of October 1981. During the subsequent investigation, he indicated the existence of other victims, gradually admitting to another four murders, eighteen rapes and an attempted murder.
He was arrested on the basis of the testimony of a mentally-ill patient who admitted to the murder of Anna Š., but the investigation later revealed that he had been securely behind bars the entire time. But the man knew how she was murdered, which was still unpublished information. Finally, the patient told the authorities that his friend showed him the scene of the crime and told how Anna was killed. That friend was Hojer, who thereafter admitted to the murder. Later, particles of cloth from his trousers were found, along with other things, as well as his blood type coinciding with the saliva and sperm samples secured at the crime scene. Hojer also possessed a knife, which he used to cut up the victims' garments.
During 1982, he admitted to another murder, bringing the count to five. Criminologists believe he committed at least two other murders, but he did not admit to them. Hojer made the confession exclusively in writing, because he was ashamed of some of his deeds and refused to speak with anyone.
For his brutal deeds, he was sentenced to death. He also withdrew his confession once. Although there was a possibility that he had committed other crimes, there was anxiety about confusing the investigators with false accusations, so the investigation was closed. Ladislav Hojer was executed on 7 August 1986 in Pankrác Prison. Before he was punished, he expressed his fear of death, and the execution was delayed twice due to the offender's illness.[1]
According to expert opinions in psychiatry, sexology and psychology, he was a primitive psychopath: an amoral, anabolic personality with schizoid features and aggressive tendencies. Criminal behavior was committed in uninterrupted consciousness and deliberately made it more difficult to reveal. He was able to hinder and correct his repeated actions. His attitude toward murders is indicative of insensitivity and brutality, the absence of at least additional sympathy, conscience or regret.
The reports showed that:
A clear guideline for explaining Hojer's motives was his exclusively negative experience with women. He tried to establish the acquaintance by using an ad. A well-dressed woman arrived at the meeting, promising to get acquainted with a financially secure middle-aged man. Hojer repulsed her with his appearance, repulsed, and reproached so hard that she had left after a few minutes. It was much more promising for Hojer to become acquainted with the young woman he met at a party with his friends. She offered him sexual intercourse in the next room. It is likely that Hojer's panic has fallen as the woman has become active and moved away. He tossed it so hard that the door's glass filled through, and ran away from the apartment. Later, he learned that this girl, with a very bad reputation, spoke to his acquaintances with him. He was always very vulgar and contemptuous about women, but he was rather passive and uncertain in their presence. He did not know how to communicate with women, and he often imagined the scenes in which the helpless girl prayed for mercy.
During the investigations and in particular reconstructions, Hojer built a special and almost friendly relationship with the criminalists. Chief Investigator Jiří Markovič [cs] even wanted to invite him to his home for a Sunday lunch. This idea was eventually summoned by his colleagues. When the Slovak murder was clarified, there was no company available, so Markovič had to play Hojer's game. Reconstructions were often very problematic because they were too much in the situation, and therefore the actors were instead replaced by mannequins. In some reconstructions, the investigators met the threats of visiting citizens who demanded Hojer's release and lynching. Hojer did not understand their reaction, which clearly testified to his inability to understand the seriousness of his crimes.
Another distinctive feature of Hojer's personality was a very dark sense of humor. One day, for example, he offered criminalists in the car that if he stopped at two hitchhikers that were passing by, he would "sniff and kill" them so they could have a quick case. His primitive way of expression was remarkable. He used turns like "I took her oxygen; I caught her by the mouth; she remained in my hands; I did not care what drunk, especially that she had a good skeleton ", etc. He said rhythm as his motto: "When my tail stands, my brain stops." He did not admit the imminent death penalty until the last moment and even enjoyed his stay in custody. It was the first time in his life he became the focus of one's interest.
