This is a list of house types. Houses can be built in a large variety of configurations. A basic division is between free-standing or single-family detached homes and various types of attached or multi-family residential dwellings. Both may vary greatly in scale and the amount of accommodation provided.
Single pen, single cell, or Hall house: a one-room house[2]
Double pen or double cell: a two-room house[3]
Central-passage or central hallway\corridor: a three-room house, with a central hallway or passage running front-to-back between the two rooms on either side of the house[6]
A hut is a dwelling of relatively simple construction, usually one room and one story in height. The design and materials of huts vary widely around the world.
Roundhouse: a house built with a circular plan
Broch: a Scottish roundhouse
Trullo: a traditional Apulian stone dwelling with a conical roof
Igloo
Bungalow is a common term applied to a low one-story house with a shallow-pitched roof (in some locations, dormered varieties are referred to as 1.5-story, such as the chalet bungalow in the United Kingdom).[11]
American Craftsman bungalow
California bungalow
Chalet bungalow in Northern Ireland
Chicago bungalow
A cottage is a small house, usually one or two story in height, although the term is sometimes applied to larger structures.
Cape Cod-style house or Cape: a style of a double-pile one-story cottage; low, broad with a steep side-gable roof to which dormers are often added to create a second story (in some locations, referred to as 1.5-story)
Dacha: cottage-type house in Russia and former union republics of the Soviet Union
Izba: a traditional Russian wooden country house
Ontario Cottage: a one- or one-and-a-half-story house with a symmetrical rectangular floor plan and a gable centred over the door, popular in small-town Ontario during the 19th century
A ranch-style house or rambler is one-story, low to the ground, with a low-pitched roof, usually rectangular, L- or U-shaped with deep overhanging eaves.[12] Ranch styles include:
An I-house is a two or three-story house that is one room deep with a double-pen, hall-parlor, central-hall or saddlebag layout.[14]
A gablefront house or gablefront cottage has a gable roof that faces its street or avenue, as in the novel The House of Seven Gables.
Split-level house is a design of house that was commonly built during the 1950s and 1960s. It has two nearly equal sections that are located on two different levels, with a short stairway in the corridor connecting them.
A tower house is a compact two or more story house, often fortified.
A longhouse is historical house type typically for family groups.
A housebarn is a combined house and barn.
